
News for version 3.10.1

Changed the default port for the BES to 10022 dues to conflicts on CentOS.

Also, fixed the way the server checks for conflicts at runtime and made the
error messages more informative.

News for version 3.10.0

Added support for the Hyrax Admin Interface (HAI). The server now
supports a set of commands that can be used to start and stop the
server; load/reload/edit the configuration files; look at logging
output; and toggle debugging output on-the-fly.

Added support for response size limits.

News for version 3.9.2

Bug fix in PPT released in this version.

News for version 3.9.1

The CSV handler was moved out of this component and mae its own
handler, with all the stuff that implies (it's onw RPM, source dist,
etc.). At teh smae time a new tool for building tests has been added -
look in the code for the dapreader classes. Email us for more
information.

Bug & Build fixes fixes.

The default location of the bes.log file is now $prefix/var/bes.log

Support for the DAP3.3 Keywords (an experimental feature).

News for version 3.9.0, 14 Sep 2010

Moved BES.Catalog.catalog.RootDirectory parameter to bes.conf so users
have to edit only one conf file for initial configuration

Allowing for conf files to include any required module configuration
files to be loaded first. For example, if ncml module requires dap
module, then the ncml module can include the dap module so that it gets
loaded and configured first. Also takes care of a problem where a
configuration file is included multiple times.

Fixed a problem where when transmitting a response any exceptions were
being absorbed and a generic exception thrown in its place.

Various bug fixes released in this new version.

News for version 3.8.4, 24 May 2010

Bug fix. IPC bug triggered by an errant handler. Likely the cause of the
runaway process bug which could be triggered by crawlers.

News for version 3.8.3, 04 May 2010

Fixed problem in logging where the actual command being executed
wasn't being logged to the log file.

News for version 3.8.2, 06 April 2010

Fixed bug in BESKeys where = was adding to a definition instead of
replacing.

Logging the received requests to the BESLog log file. Was just saying
[xml document]

News for version 3.8.1, 11 March 2010

Fixed potential bug in BES Uncompression Cache code when failure to
uncompress a file and checking size of current cache.

News for version 3.8.0, 2 February 2010

Changed the way BES configuration is modified for the different
handlers. Before, changes were made using either a target to make (make
bes-conf), or running a script (bes-x-data.sh), or making changes
directly to bes.conf. This is no longer the case. The file bes.conf will
have miner modifications (administrator email address, user and group
BES should run as, etc...) and that's it. All module configuration will
be in their own files in the etc/bes/modules directory. The bes.conf
file will include module configurations in the directory that end in
.conf. Any files that end with .conf in that directory will be loaded.
This way, bes.conf will never need to be modified after installation.

The bes.conf files that are already out there will still work. This is
the new, preferred method of configuration and we recommend that you
move to this format.

Added a new besd script that can be used to run the BES at boot/reboot
using chkconfig on linux systems. Please see besd script for more
information and ask your system administrator about gettig this
installed in the proper location.

Added a new command to test error handling by clients <showError type="x" />,
where x is 1-5 and represents the following:
1. Internal Error - the error is internal to the BES Server
2. Internal Fatal Error - error is fatal, can not continue
3. Syntax User Error - the requester has a syntax error in request or config
4. Forbidden Error - the requester is forbidden to see the resource
5. Not Found Error - the resource can not be found

Removed all old OPeNDAP CGI server 3 references and files.

DataDDX support added to the BES in the dap module.

Cleaned up doxygen documentation for the BES.

Changed all tests from dejagnu to autotest. Changed bes/dispatch unit
tests to use CPPUNIT.

News for version 3.7.2, 8 April 2009

Memory leaks fixed.

News for version 3.7.1, 16 March 2009

Many many memory issues resolved.

Fixes for constraint expression parsing issues.

The service interface is now supported.

News for version 3.7.0, 28 Jan 2009

The BES now supports TCP Wrappers (from a patch sent in by
Gareth.Williams@csiro.au - thank you).

In the past the BES used a SQL-like command language but returned XML
responses. THis seemed odd, so we've adopted a new syntax where the BES
accepts XML documents as commands (and still returns XML responses). The XML
command/documents hold XML that will look very familar to long-time BES users
but a big change is that more than one command can be included in the
document, reducing the number of messages needed to get many of the DAP
responses. The upshot is that the OLFS <--> BES communication is much more
efficient. 

TCP window tuning is now provided. The user is allowed to set the tcp window
sizes for buffer sizes by passing the receive and send buffer sizes to the
tcp connection call.

The BES Chunking scheme is now set to use a really big buffer if you want -
About 2 GB. There have been a number of fixes to the chunking code (See
ChangeLog and/or SVN for details).

News for version 3.6.2, 25 June 2008

Changed default buffer size in PPT to 65535. This should create fewer sends
and receives in the server and client code for responses making response
times faster.

Added a BESStopWatch class to help with timings between client and server,
and for any other debugging required in the BES.

Modified the BESReporter interface to allow for easier iteration through
containers in get commands.

Other minor bug fixes and enhancements to code and configuration. Refer to
the ChangeLog file for more information.

News for version 3.6.1, 11 April 2008

Bug fixed in new PPT chunking scheme

Other minor bug fixes and enhancements to code and configuration. Refer to
the ChangeLog file for more information.

News for version 3.6.0, 29 February 2008

Changed a parameter name in the bes configuration file for memory
management that contained a typo. If you receive an error "cannot determine
memory keys" then you need to update the parameter MaximunHeapSize to
MaximumHeapSize.

BES clients and servers now communicate using HTTP style chunking rather
than using terminating tokens. This greatly improves performance of the
clients and servers in that they no longer need to step through any data
received to find the terminating token. Please refer the release notes on
docs.opendap.org for Hyrax 1.4 for more information.

Exceptions/Errors have been re-written and consolidated. Changed the name of
BESException to BESError and now have only five derived classes for the
different types of errors (BESInternalError, BESInternalFatalError,
BESForbiddenError, BESNotFoundError and BESSyntaxUserError.) Each error class
has a type number associated with it to make it easier for clients to
clasify the given error. Please refer to the release notes on
docs.opendap.org for Hyrax 1.4 for more information.

BES catalog and data access now includes an option to follow symbolic links
or not, similar to what is used in Apache.  In the BES configuration file
is the new parameter BES.*.FollowSymLinks=No|Yes If set to yes, then
container and catalog requests will follow symbolic links relative to the
document root. If set to no, then we won't follow symbolic links.

The response to a 'show catalog' request will return the elements of a
dataset (directory) in alphabetical order.

The 'set container' request now verifies the existance of the data container
whereas before it did not, leaving the error to be handled by the data
handler in the get command.

Added a new method to the container class to release the container. The
access method is used to gain access to the data container. For example, the
container may need to be uncompressed and cached. The release method would
release locks on the cached item.

Added a stand-alone application with a bescmdln interface for testing
purposes. Run just like bescmdln with the addition of a -c option for the
location of the BES configuration file to use. Can pass a command via the -x
option, or load commands from a file using the -i option, dump the output to
a file using the -f option, or run it interactively.

Added .pc files for package configuration.

Other bug fixes. Please refer to the ChangeLog for more details and the
release notes on docs.opendap.org for the list of tickets resolved in this
release.

News for version 3.5.3

New option to the BES control script (besctl) to specify the location of the
bes.pid file. This was needed for some binary releases as the prefix for
installation is /usr, but the pid files are located not in /usr/var/run but in
/var/run. If not specified, then it defaults to the prefix/var/run directory.

News for version 3.5.2

New options available to the BES control script (besctl) and therefor the
bes daemon and listener applications. The new options are:

-i <install_dir> -> installation directory of the BES
-c <configuration_file> -> location of the BES configuration file to use

hyraxctl script now available to run the entire hyrax installation. This
Hyrax control script uses the BES control script besctl to start and stop
the BES. Options passed to the hyrax control script are passed on to the
BES.

The BES now determines the location of the BES configuration file in the
following manner:
1. -c option passed
2. BES_CONF environment variable
3. Look in default locations /usr/local/etc/bes/bes.conf,
/etc/bes/bes.conf, /usr/etc/bes/bes.conf

The BES now checks the full path of a file/directory against the BES
configuration parameter BES.Catalog.<catalog_name>.TypeMatch. Before it
just checked the basename of the file/directory. This now allows us to
have TypeMatch parameters that include a directory name as part of its
regular expression. This was changed to facilitate the jgofs data handler,
where the file names do not have file extensions. For example, TypeMatch
could be something like "jg:.*\/jg\/.*;"

A regular expression test program is now available in the BES source and
binary releases called besregtest that will allow
administrators/developers to test the regular expressions specified in the
BES.Catalog.<catalog_name>.Include, BES.Catalog.<catalog_name>.Exclude,
and BES.Catalog.<catalog_name>.TypeMatch configuration parameters. Usage
is:

besregtest include|exclude|type "<regular_expression>" <string_to_test>

Multiple catalogs now works. If there is more than one catalog registered
then the request must include the name of the catalog followed by a colon.
For example: show catalog for "nc_catalog:/"; If there is only one catalog
then works as before.

Added context to debugging in the BESDEBUG macro. This allows us to turn
on and off debugging for different areas of an application, such as bes,
ppt, nc (for netcdf handler), h4 (for hdf4 handler), etc... For example:

BESDEBUG( "bes", << "some debug " << endl << someobj << endl )

Also modified the -d option passed to the bes control script (besctl) and
therefor the bes daemon and listener applications to take the name of the
debug file plus context to debug.

-d "./bes.debug,bes,nc,h4"

Uncompression of .Z (zip) files is now available along with the already
existing uncompression of bz2 (bzip2) and gz (gnu zip) files.

New regression test created under bes/cmdln to test netcdf, freeform,
hdf4, hdf5, and server side functions. Must have all of these modules
installed. To run the regression test you must have a BES running with the
above specified modules loaded, then go to the bes/cmdln directory and
type make bes-configuration-tests.

Updated the csv-handler example BES modules and the hello_world example
modules. In doing so updated the besCreateModule script and all of the
template files associated with it.

News for version 3.5.1

Ticket #928 fixed in ppt code to correct finding marker issue.

News for version 3.5.0

Decompressing data files and caching of the result has been completely
reworked. It's now faster and secure.

Now when the BES has only a TCP or UNIX socket specified in the bes.conf
file, it is not an error. Thus it's possible to configure the bes to use only
UNIX or TCP sockets. When using the BES with Hyrax, use TCP and run it behind
a firewall.

The BES was modified so that it's no longer possible to look at the contents
of the host computer's file system when asking for catalog information.

News for version 3.4.2

Added some security notes to the documentation and to the configuration file
(bes.conf). By default, data file decompression is now off.

Fixed a problem with dates for Last-Modified headers on Solaris.

Fixed some memory leaks 

News Version 3.4.1

Changed the name of the release from Server4 to Hyrax.

Added two example modules under bes.

The first is the hello world module, which adds a command 'say <something>
to <someone>;' For example, 'say hello to world;'. Adds a request handler, a
response handler, a new command (the say command), and a reporter to report
what is being said to who.

The second is a csv_handler, which can read comma separated files in a
certain format. This module adds a new request handler that can handle the
typical dap responses.

Minor bug fixes and clean ups. See the ChangeLog file for more information.

News Version 3.4.0

Added a new feature to the BES, the ability to create context within the
BES. This is done through a new command 'set context <name> to <value>; The
dap module uses the context feature when determining how to deliever error
messages. If the context 'errors' is set to 'dap2' then all exceptions are
converted into libdap Error objects. The method print is then called using
stdout. This way, dap2 clients can recognize errors.

Added a hello world example module. It does not handle data requests, but a
simple command to say something to someone. It shows the power of creating
your own module. In doing this, added besCreateModule and the templates
directory to the build. Updated these files. besCreateModule is a shell
script that is used to create a new module. Using template files, it creates
source code, based on a few questions asked. The developer then adds their
own code.

News Version 3.3.1

A new default command was added, 'get stream for <definition>' that streams
back the contents of the specified definition. A definition is created as
usual, using 'set container' commands and using those containers to create
the definition.

Modified the way the container creation works. Restrictions were put on what
files can be used in a 'set container' command. You can not specify ../ in
the path of the container. You must specify a new parameter in the BES
configuration file BES.Data.RootDirectory which points to the root directory
of any containers. This is used for file type containers only.

Created a BESDebug class to allow developers to run the server with debug
option. The option to use with besctl is '-d cerr|<filename>' to output any
debug to standard error (standard out is redirected to the socket, which
would go back to the client) or to the specified file. All BES classes are
derived from BESObj, where a dump method was added to dump the contents of
an object (private data members, information about the instance) and added
an operator<< so that developers can say strm << bes_obj << endl; and have
the dump method called on that BES object.

The BES now does not require libdap. Default responses, transmitters,
commands, etc... are available through the BES: showing help, status,
process id, version information, keys defined in the configuratioon file;
streaming files using the new command; creating, showing, and deleting
containers; creating, showing, and deleting definitions. All DAP specific
commands are now in a loaded module: retrieving the DAS, DDS, DDX, DataDDS
and a transmitter to handle transmitting those response objects.

A request to the catalog now includes an attribute for the node called
isData that is true if the file can be handled by one of the data handlers
registered with the server. For example, if the name of the node ends with
.nc and the netcdf data handler is loaded into the server, then isData would
be set to true.

News Version 3.2.1

The spec file now does not list gzip and bzip2 as required. You only need them
to serve compressed files.

The bes.conf.in file used 'hdf4' in some places and 'h4' in others. This meant
that lazy people like me ;-) who didn't read what they were doing but just
blindly uncommented lines were confused. I editied the file to use the same
identifier in all places. jimg.

News Version 3.2.0

Created bes control script besctl for starting, stopping, restarting, and
checking the status of the bes daemon and listener processes.

Executibles are again in $prefix/bin instead of sbin and have been renamed
besdaemon and beslistener. The bescmdln is also in $prefix/bin.

Modules dynamically loaded by the bes should now be built with the
-avoid-version and -module flags in LDFLAGS. This will not put version
information in the module names themselves. All modules should be of the
form xxx_module

dap-server now has bes support for getting ascii, info, and html responses
from the bes. Check the README for both bes and dap-server for these
updates. To use these modules, simply add ascii_module, usage_module and
www_module to the list of modules for bes to load.

Modules are now names using the name from the configuration file. The data
types are also named using the name in the BES.modules list. For example,
for the hdf4_module if you use BES.modules=dap,cmd,h4 then the handler will
handle data of type h4. For example:

set container values c,hdf/test01.hdf,h4;

BES will then look for the data handler h4 to be loaded.

Transmitter code (derived classes of BESTransmitter) only handle BESInfo
objects. For additional types of response objects, such as the OpeNDAP
responses das, dds, data, etc... developers will register functions with the
different transmitters to handle those types. See BESDapTransmit for
examples.

News Version 3.1.1

The old killdods script has been renamed 'stopbes' and the build files have
been fixed so that the script is installed in $prefix/sbin.

The dap_cmd module is now named dap_cmd_module to follow the pattern set for
the other modules.

The bes.conf file in dispatch/bes is now a generated file with some of the
paths filled in based on $prefix. The file also contains sample text for
three common data handlers.

Fixes to the XML output/response formats. See ChangeLog

Fixes to the exception notifications. See ChangeLog.

News Version 3.1.0

This version of the BES is the first version to make it to a release status.
This is an release of the 1.2 milestone.
